---
title: Adding Custom Packages to Buildroot
date: 2022-02-24 12:42:06.000000000 +05:30
classes: wide
published: true
categories:
- Articles
- Tutorial
tags:
- buildroot
- linux
- riscv
header:
  teaser: "images/posts/buildrootCust/buildrootCust_teaser.png"
  og_image: "images/posts/buildrootCust/buildrootCust_teaser.png"
excerpt: "This article talks about adding a custom package into buildroot for creating your own Linux distribution for embedded and emulation targets."

---


<style>
div {
  text-align: justify;
  text-justify: inter-word;
}
</style>

{% include base_path %}

This is a quick tutorial on adding a custom package into buildroot for creating your own Linux distribution for embedded and emulation targets. You can find detailed instructions in the [buildroot documentation](https://buildroot.org/downloads/manual/manual.html#adding-packages)

[Buildroot](https://buildroot.org/) allows you to quickly generate full-fledged cross-compiled Linux systems. It comes with a tonne of packages that you can select while configuring. They are then cross-compiled into the final root file system generated by Buildroot. But, how do you add a new package into Buildroot? It might be a proprietary tool or a package not yet upstreamed into Buildroot. This article covers the basics of how this can be done.

There are two main methods to add a custom package into buildroot. The first method includes adding a package directly into the source tree and is described here. The second involves the use of an external package tree. A reference to using the second method is provided at the end of this article. 

Let us consider that you have a custom package (`embeddedinn`) that you would like to include in your Root FS created with buildroot. This package will consist of a source file and a makefile in the most straightforward case.

#### Source (`package/embeddedinn/src/embeddedinn.c`): 

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
printf("EMBEDDEDINN\r\n");
}
```

#### `package/embeddedinn/src/Makefile`

```

.PHONY: clean
.PHONY: embeddedinn

embeddedinn: embeddedinn.c
    $(CC) -o '$@' '$<'

clean:
    -rm embeddedinn
```

> Note: Makefile requires a tab character for indentation. Spaces will not work.

Now, let us create a package definition for this package in the buildroot source tree. In this case, we are assuming that the package is located in the `/package/` directory and is locally available. Buildroot also lets you pull package contents from `git`, `svn`, `wget`, `tar.gz` etc. 

Within the Buildroot source tree, you can create an `embeddedinn` directory under the `package` directory and create two files: `embeddedinn.mk` and `Config.in` within the `embeddedinn` directory.


#### `package/embeddedinn/Config.in`

```
config BR2_PACKAGE_EMBEDDEDINN
    bool "embeddedinn"
    help
        embeddedinn package.

        https://embeddedinn.xyz
```

#### `package/embeddedinn/embeddedinn.mk`

```
################################################################################
#
# embeddedinn package
#
################################################################################

EMBEDDEDINN_VERSION = 1.0
EMBEDDEDINN_SITE = package/embeddedinn/src
EMBEDDEDINN_SITE_METHOD = local# Other methods like git,wget,scp,file etc. are also available.

define EMBEDDEDINN_BUILD_CMDS
    $(MAKE) CC="$(TARGET_CC)" LD="$(TARGET_LD)" -C $(@D)
endef

define EMBEDDEDINN_INSTALL_TARGET_CMDS
    $(INSTALL) -D -m 0755 $(@D)/embeddedinn  $(TARGET_DIR)/usr/bin
endef

$(eval $(generic-package))
```

> Note: In the latest version of buildroot that I tested (`2022.11.1`), a trailing space after `local` in the `EMBEDDEDINN_SITE_METHOD` variable causes buildroot to fail since it then tries to download the package over the network.

Now create a link to the `Config.in` file by making an entry in the `package/Config.in` file of Buildroot.

#### `package/Config.in`:

```
menu "EMBEDDEDINN Packages"
    source "package/embeddedinn/Config.in"
endmenu
```

At this stage, the package will become visible in the menu and can be enabled to make an entry in the .config file.

{% include image.html
    img="images/posts/buildrootCust/menu1.png"
    width="600"
    caption="Menu for EMBEDDEDINN packages"
%}

{% include image.html
    img="images/posts/buildrootCust/menu2.png"
    width="600"
    caption="EMBEDDEDINN package details"
%}


> To configure the package, I did `make qemu_riscv64_virt_defconfig` and then `make menuconfig`. The new package will be available under `Target Packages`

Issuing a make command will build the package and include it into the generated root file system.

In this case, I am executing the generated RFS on a RISCV QEMU `virt` machine using the `start-qemu` script generated by buildroot. The `embeddedinn` command is now available in the generated RFS. 
    
{% include image.html
    img="images/posts/buildrootCust/qemu.png"
    width="600"
    caption="EMBEDDEDINN command in RFS"
%}

## BR2_EXTERNAL

If you want to maintain the project-specific source code outside the buildroot tree, you can use the `BR2_EXTERNAL` mechanism detailed in the [Buildroot documentation](https://buildroot.org/downloads/manual/manual.html#outside-br-custom). The path to BR2_EXTERNAL is passed to `make` invocation, and from that point onwards, buildroot considers the external tree as a part of the buildroot build process. A `.br2-external.mk` file is also generated in the output directory to avoid entering the `BR2_EXTERNAL` paths for every `make` invocation. 


## Some useful commands when working with packages

The following commands are for the `embeddedinn` package we added here. But it works for any package in buildroot. Just replace `embeddedinn` with the package name.

|command|description|
|:-|:-|
|make embeddedinn| Build the package and install it on target|
|make embeddedinn-dirclean|Remove the build directory for the package|
|make embeddedinn-rebuild|restart the compilation and installation of the package|


Stages are tracked by buildroot by creating the following stamp files in the `output/build/<package>-<version>` directory.

```bash
 .stamp_built
 .stamp_configured
 .stamp_installed
 .stamp_rsynced
 .stamp_target_installed
```

You can restart the build process at any stage by deleting the corresponding stamp file. For example, if you want to restart the build process after the package has been built, you can delete the `.stamp_built` file.
